---
title: TODO
author:
- Brian D. Connelly

geometry: margin=1in
bibliography: references.bib
csl: nature.csl

output:
    pdf_document:
        number_sections: yes
        toc: yes
    html_document:
        number_sections: no
        theme: default
        toc: yes
    word_document:
        fig_height: 5in
        fig_width: 5in

---

Cooperative behaviors are abundant across the tree of life. Insects divide
labor within their colonies, plants and soil bacteria exchange required
nutrients, birds provide care for others' young, and the trillions of cells in
the human body coordinate to provide vital functions. But each instance of
cooperation presents an evolutionary challenge---how can individuals that
sacrifice their own well-being to help others avoid subversion by those that do
not? Over time, we would expect these "defectors" to become more abundant at
the expense of others, eventually driving cooperators (and perhaps the entire
population) to extinction.

A number of factors have been found to defer this potential *tragedy of the
commons* [@hardin1968tragedy; @hamilton1964geneticalboth; @nowak2006five;
@west2007evolutionary]. Perhaps most critically, close relatives must be more
likely to receive the benefits of cooperation than others. This can occur when
populations cooperators are clustered together in spatially-structured
populations [TODO refs] or when cooperators use communication
[@darch2012density; @brown2001cooperation] or other traits
[@gardner2010greenbeards] to identify others and cooperate conditionally.
Interestingly, genetic association with vital non-cooperative traits can also
bolster cooperation [@dandekar2012bacterial; @asfahl2015nonsocial;
@foster2004pleiotropy], and possibly set the stage for an "adaptive race" in
which cooperators and non-cooperators vie to gain the first highly-beneficial
non-social adaptation [@waite2012adaptation; @morgan2012selection]. As part of
a BEACON-funded project, we have recently developed a model based on microbial
experimentation and shown that this process is substantially more likely to
give cooperators a leg up in the adaptive race when cooperation increases
population density and thus the likelihood of acquiring beneficial mutations.
However, this advantage is fleeting (TODO figure?). Once adaptation is no
longer possible, cooperators are once again at a disadvantage against defectors
unless an environmental change paves the way for further adaptation. As seen in
Figure TODO, cooperation can be maintained indefinitely if environmental change
occurs regularly and frequently.

TODO: what about endogenous change?



[@hamblin2014viral]


# References

