\clearpage

# Box 1: Description of niche construction in our model {#box1}

See [Figure B1](#figB1)

(**A**) **Individuals.** The genome of each individual consists of a single *cooperation locus* and $L$ *adaptive loci* (here, $L=5$).
At the cooperation locus (labeled \textit{0}), this individual has allele 1, making it a cooperator.
The adaptive loci (labeled \textit{1-5}) are arranged as a circular chromosome, where each locus has an integer allele between 0 and $A$, inclusive.
In the description that follows, we focus exclusively on these adaptive loci.
Genotypes are given by their allelic states starting with locus \textit{1}.
For instance, the genotype shown here is [2,0,5,2,1].
Because of their circular structure, allele 2 at the first locus follows allele 1 at the fifth locus.

(**B**) **Niche Construction.**
Consider a subpopulation fixed for genotype [1,2,0,0,0].
This subpopulation constructs environment $E_{[1,2,0,0,0]}$.
Every non-zero allele influences selection at the next locus, favoring sequential allelic states.
In this constructed environment, allele 3 at locus \textit{3} would be favored.
If genotype [1,2,3,0,0] arises via mutation, it is expected to fix.
However, genotype [1,2,3,0,0] affects the environment differently.
As [1,2,3,0,0] rises in abundance, the constructed environment changes to $E_{[1,2,3,0,0]}$, which favors [1,2,3,4,0].

(**C**) **Niche Construction and Adaptation.**
The evolutionary transition shown in Part B is indicated in the dashed box.
Here, we depict entire subpopulations fixed for a genotype using a single instance of that genotype.
Similarly, an arrow represents niche construction and adaptation to the constructed environment.
We start with a case in which there are five alleles ($A=5$).
Subpopulations begin with the non-adapted genotype [0,0,0,0,0], shown on the far left.
A non-zero allele is introduced via mutation, which represents an adaptation to external aspects of the environment.
Here, allele 1 arises and fixes at locus \textit{1}.
The remainder of this figure focuses on adaptation to the constructed aspects of the environment.
This genotype has a "mismatch" (shown by the red sector), because $E_{[1,0,0,0,0]}$ favors [1,2,0,0,0].
Assuming allele 2 arises at the second locus, it will be selected, creating a "match" at the first and second loci (green sector).
Now there is a mismatch between the second and third loci in the resulting environment, which a new round of mutation and selection corrects, and so on.
The green sector grows as the red sector shifts clockwise.
When the population reaches [1,2,3,4,5], it constructs $E_{[1,2,3,4,5]}$.
Here, since allele 1 follows allele 5, there is no longer a mismatch, so no further adaptation occurs.

(**D**) **Negative Niche Construction.**
A different case emerges when the number of alleles does not evenly divide into the number of loci.
Here, we change the number of alleles to six ($A=6$).
As shown on the far left, we begin with a subpopulation fixed for genotype [1,2,3,4,5]. 
This genotype has a mismatch, because the niche constructed by allele 5 favors allele 6 (not 1) at the next locus (locus \textit{1}).
A mutant with genotype [6,2,3,4,5] has a fitness advantage and can fix in $E_{[1,2,3,4,5]}$.
However, as this type constructs $E_{[6,2,3,4,5]}$, a new mismatch appears.
In this instance of negative niche construction, adapting to correct one mismatch generates a new mismatch.
This system can never escape its mismatches---the red sector just shifts clockwise around the genome perpetually.

