# Results

A major component of our hypothesis is that stress provides opportunity for further adaptation.  To illustrate that we will start with a simple case where stress adaptation is either present or absent. 

Without stress adaptation (L=0), following a brief increase in producer proportion, non-producers fix (Fig. 2a).  To explain this pattern, we note that stress thins the metapopulation, leading to isolated populations of either producers or non-producers.  The initial lift in producer proportion is due to the greater productivity of isolated producer populations compared to non-producers; however, once migration mixes these populations, producers are outcompeted by non-producers due to the cost of production.

A dramatically different picture emerges when organisms can adapt to stress.  In such a case (L=8), producers now fix (Fig. 2b).  The initial dynamics are similar to the case without stress adaptation (clustered and isolated populations).  However, the greater productivity of the producer populations enables a faster rate of adaptation to the stress (the greater the population size, the more mutational opportunities).  In contrast to the L=0 case (no adaptation to stress), when producers and non-producers now meet through migration, the fitter producer can now competitively displace the non-producer despite the cost of production (see supplemental movies).  More generally, the supplementary movies show producer populations as epicenters of rapid adaptation spreading and displacing non-producer-dominated populations.  

In the above simple scenario, mutation rates from producers to non-producers were zero.  When we allow for de novo non-producers to arise via mutation, we still observe a pronounced increase in producer proportion when organisms can adapt to stress (L=8) (Fig. 2c,d).  However, this increase is transient.  Because the number of stress loci is finite, eventually producers will discover the genotype that is most adapted to the stress.  At this point, any de novo non-producers will be equally stress-adapted but will save on production costs, and thereafter displace producers.  

Given the transient nature of producer success, we use the integral under the producer proportion curve as a measure of producer success (Fig. 3a).  As the number of stress loci increases, producers fare better (Fig. 3b).  Not surprisingly, cumulative producer presence increases as the benefits of production increase (Fig. 3c) or the costs of productions decrease (Fig. 3d).  

Matters are a bit more complicated with migration, where producer presence peaks at intermediate levels (Fig. 4a).  At high migration rates, producers have insufficient time to adapt to the stress before mixture with non-producers.  Conversely, with low rates of migration, there is sufficient time to adapt to stress; however, there is insufficient export of adapted producers into less adapted non-producer populations.  

The effects of mutation rate are also complex (Fig. 4b).  At low mutation rates, we see high variance – in some cases producers do well (if they are the first to discover a stress mutation) or they do poorly (if they are not).  At intermediate levels, as mutation rates increase, producer presence decreases.  The two contributing factors are that de novo non-producers are more likely to arise (with higher production mutation rates, µp), and that the isolated non-producers are better able to adapt to the stress themselves (with higher stress mutation rates, µs).  When mutation rates are high, the producer presence increases due to a mutation-selection balance (see supplemental figure).

If a series of stressful environments is experienced, we see producer proportion can be maintained at high values (Fig. 5a).  More generally, as the frequency of environmental change increases from zero, producer presence increases because there are multiple episodes for this process to play out.  Note that as the rate of environmental change increases further, however, there is insufficient time to adapt to the stress and export adapted types before the environment changes, so producer presence decreases.

